---
title: intuitive confusions with intuition
desc: when does our learning become intuitive
slug: intuitive-confusions-with-intuition
---

While I was a graduate student at Washington State University, I got to work with a wide variety of students. I ran physics labs for engineering students, life science students, and helped in lectures with elementary education majors. As a part of my teaching strategy, I often like to engage in a dialogue with students about the work they complete to help in the process of creating the knowledge they can use to tackle physics concepts. In this dialogue, as a reflective analysis, I often find myself asking students to evaluate their "physics knowledge" relative to their intuitions. And it's in this prompt to students where I reach a thought provoking question: when does formal knowledge become intuitive?

At what point does physics understanding that may seem unintuitive to an introductory student learn in a physics course become intuitive arguments to me? And at what point do things that I learn become intuitive to my professors? Let's consider three distinct levels of physics practitioner: an introductory physics student, a graduate students like myself, and a very old professor. We can imagine giving each of us the situation of dropping objects of different weights and ask the question, "which one of these will hit the ground first?" Without any formal mathematics or physics, one could image believing the intro physics student saying, "I think the heavier one will drop quicker because my intuition says that heavier things are pulled down harder by gravity." And myself and a professor may say something along the lines of, "They'll both hit the ground at the same time. Although the heavier object is pulled on harder by the earth, it's inertia is higher meaning everything is balanced out" or even simply "all objects accelerate by g close to the surface of earth." Either way, there's a clear distinction between what an intro student and I might consider to be an _intuition_. And the student's intuition sadly hurts them.

I have vague recollections of conversation with my graduate quantum mechanics professor during office hours. He just seemed to have such a deeper understanding of the topic -- lucky him, he did research in quantum chaos. In fact, his inability to recognize the gap in knowledge we sadly a big reason I stopped going to office hours later in the year. For example, the amount of time he'd throw asymptotic analysis my way, having never learned it formally, made it really difficult to even communicate ideas between each other. He couldn't "dumb ideas down" for me and I couldn't get an understanding of the intuitions behind asymptotic analysis.

It seems natural to define intuitive arguments as arguments rooted in conclusions drawn from personal experience. It may also seem natural to consider this knowledge as unconscious. So, how long does it take the intro student to pull experiences from a physics course as opposed to the playground when asked the questions of dropping objects? If defining intuition as informed by experience, then it only makes sense that intuitions change only when the experiences informed by the physics courses out way the "misinformed" experiences. And I can only imagine what intuitions might consist of during that transitional stage where both types of experiences occupy similar amounts of unconscious thought.

That's all I have for now. I'll have to keep thinking about this or see if other people have been thinking about this as deeply as I have.
