---
title: Science for All Reflection
desc: A reflection of an NGSS case study addressing INTASC 2, Learning Differences
date: 2025-08-30 21:58
slug: ngss-learning-differences
---

Throughout **[this case study](https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/%284%29%20Case%20Study%20ELL%206-14-13.pdf)**, English language learning functions as a paradox. English isn’t simply a tool for communication; it can be a tool for oppression, reinforcing structural inequality and necessitating proficiency to create opportunity. In our school systems, we can see this inequality as “science achievement gaps between ELL and non-English language learners widened considerably from 2005 to 2009 for 4th, 8th, and 12th graders.” Our educational policy is evolving with this in mind, prioritizing our ELL students’ English proficiency and devaluing multilingual instruction. Understanding English as an oppressive gatekeeping mechanism, the message is clear: for ELL students to succeed at the same rate as native speakers, they should focus on learning English in school and deprioritize the use of home languages. On the other hand, English is a tool for empowerment. For families who immigrated to the United States for opportunities not previously available to them, learning English empowers them. It creates opportunities for higher-paying jobs, enacting civil change, and constructing meaningful change in their material conditions. Additionally, science itself is a global endeavor, and many international collaborations conduct research in English; therefore, learning the language empowers students to engage with current scientific developments.

As I’ve described, the English language both oppresses and empowers ELL students, depending on how school systems position the language in our schools. As educators, it’s our responsibility to minimize the language’s potential for oppression while empowering students to use the English language; although the two are never entirely separate. In my classes, I’ll implement multiple modes of representation and engagement to address the paradox. The NGSS recommends providing multiple modes of representation (e.g., gestures, pictures, text) to support language learning when working with science content. These strategies deemphasize the requirement to know the language to engage with the material—an oppressive function of English learning. At the same time, the instructional strategy provides opportunities to learn both science content and the English language, tailored to individual proficiency levels. As students become more proficient, they can communicate more efficiently with native speakers, therefore empowering them in equitable dialogue with their native peers. Instruction should also create experiences built upon native languages, demonstrating the value of their native languages as both a learning tool and a cultural lens. However, I plan to create experiences that offer opportunities for ELL students to engage in immersive dialogue in English, thereby supporting their language learning.

In the case study, Mrs. H facilitates another category of instructional strategy: facilitating learning experiences at home through collaborative efforts with parents. It’s an available resource that I hadn’t previously considered, but after reflecting on its use in this context, I realize it’s a highly engaging strategy to highlight the relevance of science through different perspectives from the teacher. In this strategy, Mrs. H was not only able to connect content to the prior experiences of the students, but also the experiences of their parents. This could be a strong way to convey cultural significance to the students. For physics and math, I’m curious about the possible discussion that can be created at home in the way Mrs. H facilitates them. Those subjects, I believe, are more prone to parent disengagement with the content; it’s pretty typical to hear parents joke about giving up on their children’s math homework after the 3rd grade. So, if I were to attempt to create conversations at home supported by native language communication, close attention would have to be paid to creating dialogue that parents can meaningfully contribute to. I could design discrepant event activities to complete at home with the help of a parent, and then provide questions for students and parents to discuss together. The emphasis would not be on correctness, but instead on attempting to describe misconceptions and their relation to prior experiences.
